1.0 X16 Motherboard and Case Setup
Carefully remove the X16 mainboard from any
packaging padding.
IF YOU DON’T YET HAVE A CASE:
The X16 board can safely sit atop the thin padding
that it came with. Avoid “flexing” or twis􀆟ng the
board (keep it flat).
IF YOU NEED A CASE:
Seek an “ATX” case. The ATX standard for computer
cases has been around since 1995. The
standard mostly helps establish the spots for
“stand-off” screws to mount a motherboard to a
chassis, along with standard holes for moun􀆟ng
an “ATX-style” power supply unit (PSU). ATX
cases are plen􀆟ful to find (new or used) and are
available in “desktop” (lower profile) or
“tower” (upright) styles.
Most new-cases will come with a set of stand-off
screws. But if not, “computer screw assortment
kits” can be found online. The rubber washer sits
below the screw, to help make it easier to remove
those screws in the future. The X16 motherboard
has 9x stand-off holes.
Remember to
ground yourself or
touch metal (keys
or paperclip) before
handling
electronic equipment.
Some ATX cases
have built-in
stand-offs.
IF YOU HAVE THE OFFICIAL CASE:
The Lazer3D case comes pre-fi􀆩ed with the 9x stand-off
screws, but does not include the rubber washers (they
aren’t really necessary). The assembly of the case takes
about 20-40 minutes and requires only a regular sized
Philips head screwdriver.

1.1 Keyboard and Mouse Connec􀆟ons
The X16 uses PS/2 style mouse and keyboard
connec􀆟ons. These type of connec􀆟ons are
simpler and have less overhead to implement
than USB. And, arguably, PS/2 connec􀆟ons
are more reliable (par􀆟cularly at very early
stages of the system startup process) and
more secure (also offering more equalized
performance in tournaments) than USB.
Because PS/2 style connectors are rela􀆟vely
easy to make, they remain widely supported
worldwide, making them very affordable.
The PS/2 Keyboard connector is typically iden-
􀆟fied with a purple connector end, with an
embedded keyboard-icon iden􀆟fying the
“top” posi􀆟on. The PS/2 mouse connector
typically has a green connector end, with a
mouse-icon. These connectors are at the rear
-right corner of the mainboard.
PS/2 style
connec􀆟ons
were introduced
by IBM
in 1987, replacing
the
aging DIN
style.
CA-2014RB (non-USB)
4W Peak Output
Op􀆟onal Cables (may be necessary
if using a stereo receiver)
1.2 Audio Connec􀆟on
For audio output, the X16 includes a two-ring “stereo jack” located next to the keyboard
and mouse connectors. This jack can use headphones or amplified stereo
speakers. Some speakers or stereo equipment may use the red/white RCA style
inputs. In that case, the stereo-output cable of the X16 can be adapted to a Yspli
􀆩er (or “stereo to dual mono” adapters).
There are countless desktop stereo speaker op􀆟ons, just avoid the ones with USB
connec􀆟ons. More expensive speaker op􀆟ons may include a sub-woofer. 4Wa􀆩s
power output is sufficient for a small room.

1.3 Video Connec􀆟ons
The X16 supports three video output op􀆟ons:
· VGA (DB15)
· S-Video
· Composite (RCA)
While all three connectors can be connected
at the same 􀆟me, the system will only have
one ac􀆟ve video output at a 􀆟me.
In general, VGA provides the best quality and
is easiest to adapt to modern video-display
equipment. Modern VGA cables typically
have a blue connector end, but some can
also have black.
S-Video is technically be􀆩er quality than
Composite video. Some􀆟mes VCR’s will have
an S-Video input. Take care to avoid bending
the 4-pins within the connector end.
Composite video (or also called RCA) typically
has a yellow end connector. It is the easiest
to connect because the orienta􀆟on of the
cable does not ma􀆩er.
S-Video and Composite is intended for older
CRT type displays. To go really old-school,
you can also find Composite to RF or BNC
adapters!

1.4 Adap􀆟ng to HDMI
Each of the X16 video outputs (VGA, S-Video,
Composite) can be adapted to HDMI. Many
modern televisions and display devices will
use HDMI. Smaller or thinner devices (such
as portable LCD screens) may use mini-HDMI
or micro-HDMI.
The HDMI
standard was
first introduced
in
2002.
Adap􀆟ng VGA to HDMI requires a “VGA to HDMI” adapter (or some vendors will use
the term “converter” or “dongle”). Look for one that is “ac􀆟ve” (powered by 5V USB)
and also “with audio.” Then consider the cable length you want: short (for a display
that is on a desktop) or long (such as a larger display that is up on a wall). The 5V
USB source will not go into the X16— instead use a suitable USB wall adapter (and a
USB extension if necessary).
Composite Video Cable S-Video Cable
Stereo Audio Cable
(two rings)
VGA to HDMI Adapter
(ac􀆟ve, with audio)
USB Wall Outlet
Charge Adapter USB Extension Cable
Stereo Audio Spli􀆩er
HDMI
Adap􀆟ng Composite or S-Video to HDMI is the same idea, but will generally require a
larger “box” type adapter that also requires its own DC power source. If you have an
HDMI display available, there is li􀆩le reason to use these op􀆟ons over VGA. The
Composite and S-Video output of the X16 is generally used to connect older CRT displays
that s􀆟ll have these as na􀆟ve inputs (which gives a more “vintage experience”).

1.5 Power Supply Connec􀆟on
The X16 motherboard has a standard ATX
power connector. This can use a regular full
size ATX power supply unit (PSU) that is typically
in the 300W-600W range, or use a simpler
ATX picoPSU in the 70-160W range.
Make sure the ATX connector is fully seated.
The connector should only fit one way, per the
shape of the connector itself. The older 20-pin
ATX connector can be used, but more modern
PSUs will have a 24-pin connector (also some-
􀆟mes called “20+4”).
If using a picoATX, a wall AC adapter to 12VDC
is needed (with about 800mA to 2A).

If you don’t yet have the Front Panel
(FP) connectors in place, then press the
red POWER bu􀆩on here to toggle the
system on and off.
